We were talking about the treatment and the
medicine.
Was there ever any danger that, as far as when
you're in surgery, that you might have drug
addiction at all, or did they keep that regulated?
No. In fact, now, although I do have a lot of pain, I
control the pain basically with hypnosis. When
did you learn hypnosis? I picked up on hypnosis in
high school and was sort of self-taught and
practiced. Later in college I ran into a doctor
there that used hypnosis for childbirth and he led
me down a good path. it became very useful when I was
smoke jumping. I could lay down almost anywhere or
hypnotize myself and say I'll wake up in 30 seconds
or 5 minutes or whatever and that's during smoke
jumping some of the times that was most rest I would
get for maybe one or two weeks at a time. That's good
training for when you were in Yes.
Have you ever seen any patients or know of any
patients who have become addicted to drugs while
in the VA?
Oh, I know patients that are addicted to drugs that
were vying out at the VA, but now where this was
caused from the VA or by themselves, I don't know.
Do they have any drug abuse programs
for these people at the VA itself, or do they have to
go outside? I don't know, Wally, if they have drug
abuse. I know they have one complete war there that
they have for alcoholics,
which I believe alcohol is a drug. So it's,
although it's a legal drug, they have a program
there, and I know people who are alcoholics, and
it's real sad. As far as your therapy, how did they
prepare you for your, you know, to get your
artificial leg? and prosthesis?
Just like any other medical facility would with
physical therapy and fitting of the leg and so on
and so forth. I know at that time I had a very
difficult time. I was in traction for three
months. I became allergic to anything that sticks
like I and I was in skin traction so what they would
do would put a stockinette around your skin pull
the skin down over the bone at the end of the stump
and they start out using tincture benzoin or tough
skin and I became allergic to that and then
surgical easy I can came allergic to that and and
you just have to clean off the leg every day and
reapply it and so on. I think this was mainly
because of Agent Orange.
How long was it before you were able to try the
prosthesis the first time? About six months. What
was that experience like the first time you had it
on? Very
unusual.
First of all, most people who lose a limb, they
think they can put a prosthesis on and just get up
and walk away. But it doesn't happen that way. I've
seen a lot of amputees, and I've never seen one that
could do it. and some people adapt to it very well
maybe because of the way their bone structure is
and so on and so forth or skin and whatever but I had
extremely a lot of difficulty with mine because of
skin breakdown and things like this and that is the
main reason why I was in the hospital so long was
because of this I read something in one book that I
was reading, but I really never understood it. And
that was the subject of what they called phantom
pains. Did this ever occur with you? I think all
amputees have phantom pains. The medical
background is that your nerves
that go down the spinal cord are one long nerve
clear down to like your toes or your fingers and if
you cut off that nerve then it's cut off but your
brain still gets the impulses from that nerve when
it's stimulated even though where it's cut off
from and although you don't have that limb you can
feel things in that and it feels just like the limb
you had. And this is the reason why is when that
nerve is stimulated then you get the same feeling.
Is there ever, do you learn to adapt with it or is it
just something that happens? Well at first you
generally have a lot of them and eventually I think
you reprogram your brain to eliminate that. Now,
there is a period, a period of time that
maybe you can look and see that one of your limbs are
gone, and you know it's gone. You can feel it so
strong that your heart doesn't believe it. is the
way I have to put, and lots of times it took me about
three or four months before my heart accepted the
fact that it was gone.
When were you released from Brooks? On what day? It
was in January of 68.
Since that time, Talking about compensation from
the government, has the government made
available the funds for you to live comfortably,
or have you had any trouble with this? It's almost a
full-time job finding the government for your
benefits.
What are the biggest problems that you see in this,
the funds? Right now, I cannot be employed And
under the VA regulations, it says that if you're
60% or more service-connected disability and
cannot be employed, then you can get 100% for
unemployment.
And I've been finding them for, I guess it's going
on five years, to regain my 100%. I have not
succeeded yet. How can you find them? What methods
do you use? Well, there's a regular chain that you
go through, review boards and so on and so forth.
What is your opinion of these federal agencies who
make the disability evaluations?
In
some cases, it's not the federal agency. I know
when I got caught up with it, it was because of the
Carter administration. And before Jimmy Carter
was running for re-election. He already had in the
mail that everybody who was under 55 years of age
and was not 100% service-connected disability
would be reviewed. And I got caught up in that
review, and I got mine taken away from me. I have not
gotten it back since. And the funny thing was, just
after the election, all these reviews went out
immediately after the election. Have you found
that President Reagan has been more helpful, or
has the situation improved? In some degree, it's
improved, but maybe because of it. Now, I'm
also... have disability from Social Security.
And that took a long fight to get that. But between
my military retirement and my Social Security
disability that I can live comfortably. But the
difference between 80% and 100% with the VA is not
only a lot of medical benefits, but also there is
the difference of approximately $500.
What sort of an insurance plan do you get?
Well, I have a government insurance plan that is
being paid for now. When I was in the service, there
was no government insurance. You had to buy your
own insurance, which I had then. But since then,
since I've had higher disabilities add on, since
my injury, that are service-connected, that I was
able to get a $10,000 life insurance, which I, as
long as I I'm
not employed, the government pays the premiums on
this insurance. Would you rather see it more
not national level but more personal level?
How can you do that?
It's been suggested that the VA system be phased
out in favor of a program of insurance credits. And
I don't know if you've heard about this or not, but I
ran across it in the Ralph Nader report. Do you
think this might be a better alternative than the
present VA system? No, I think it would be worse.
Why is that? Well, because Well, I understand
under that, that would be fall under Medicare. And
then, like, when I go up for service-connected
disabilities at the hospital, I don't have to pay
any money for it whatsoever. But under Medicare,
you do. You have a regular premium, you have
deductible, and it only takes a certain amount of
things and for a certain length of time. and say
like I can only
go up and have a certain number of appointments for
a ailment, say like my stump that breaks down
constantly and I have infections in it
constantly. What
Medicare plan is, that they take a average of all
the people, and then they say, OK, the average is
this, so you can have up to this. And that
eliminates any individuality whatsoever, where
my stump is constantly breaking down and with
infections, but yet
I get the same benefits I will be limited to my
benefits when somebody else's would not break
down whatsoever. So you feel the VA is more of a
personal type of thing? Well, I wouldn't say yes
would be much more personal than what Medicare and
their Social Security would be or a program like
that. And what is even more personal is your
military hospitals, which I have access to right
now also. So here in San Antonio, I have three large
hospitals. I can go for medical care free right
now. Can't beat
that. It's 15 years now to society. How do you feel
about the rest of society in general? I've read
where a lot of Vietnam veterans have differing
views. Well, I think that's the same with any
cross-section of the American population. I've
read where a lot of people are cynical. Do you ever
feel any cynicism towards the society at all?
No, but I think there's a lot of truth in it that I've
heard a lot of veterans say that when they apply for
a job that they can't get because they're a Vietnam
veteran. Now whether this is true or not, I don't
know.
Besides the obvious adjustments you had to make,
what sort of changes did you notice when you got
back from Vietnam? Well, I had to change my whole
lifestyle because I was a very avid skier, racer,
mountain climbing, and I used to skydive and so on.
my whole outlook I had to change. I had to make a
complete change of lifestyle.
What did you find helped you the most in helping you
cope with your disability?
I don't know, I guess it's just like I said before,
it's either inbred or it's not.
Just a will to go on. How did, do you think, what was
the effect of the Army on you? Did the service
change you in any way? No, I don't think so.
How has war, just war itself, changed your outlook
on life, or has it? Well, I don't go hunting
anymore. I used to like to hunt. Maybe I have some
part of a feeling of what it's like to be shot at.
It changes your outlook that way. In the late
1960s, these are all just a lot of little general
questions that I just had and couldn't, found
trouble fitting them in. In the late 1960s, a lot
of, mostly the youth, college students and
whatnot, started opposing our involvement in the
Vietnam War. What was your feelings towards the
protest movements? I think they have a right to
protest, but I don't think they have a right to
infringe on the other person's freedoms under the
Constitution. And I think they were doing this.
Were you ever confronted by any of the Vietnam
veterans against the war organizations at all?
No, I've stayed clear. Like normally, your normal
veterans organizations such as your VFW and
American Legion, I don't normally approve of them
because the only thing they are is a place where
they'll get drunk, the way I feel. And that's not
the right way of doing things. You had mentioned
that you're in the Special Forces organization in
this Alamo chapter. Talk a little bit about that.
What is the objectives of this organization? To be
of service to the community and to bring people
together who had the same camaraderie during the
war.
We are active in that. We're trying to become
active in a volunteer program up at the VA
hospital. And we have set up a scholarship fund for
children of the special forces or the ones who died
in Vietnam. to help them through, we're trying to
set up a scholarship fund for that. And we believe
in the American way, Constitution, and you might
say we're more a military-like organization
that, like on the veterans parades and so on, we try
to participate in, and we do this quite a bit. Have
you found in your community services, have you
found that the community has been receptive?
Well, we aren't big enough yet to really find out,
but I feel what little feedback we have is that it's
very positive. That's great. Now, one thing
coming up in, I believe, October, we're going to
have 5K runs. Fort Sam, and we're throwing a little
extra twist in it. For the people who want to, they
can go through a pretty good obstacle course with
the run. Oh, gosh. Test your endurance. You're
right. How are you all funded, basically? From
news. So you all don't get any really outside help
at all? No. The dues and gifts from different
people. I have two last questions, and they're
very personal questions.
Do you feel, looking back at it now, was the Vietnam
War worthwhile to you? Yes.
tensions mounting up in Central America and the
Middle East and abroad. What is your opinion of war
itself? Well, I believe that we should defend our
country and our allies. That's all the questions I
have and I really thank you a lot. You've been a
tremendous inspiration to me and I think anybody
who you know and talk to. And in closing, I was
wondering if there's anything you'd like to say.
No. Thank you very much. You're welcome.